Let's engage with
disabled people about what
we are going to do for them.
We must remember to ensure
everyone is consulted, including a
small percentage of disabled people.
It's fine for others to
speak on their behalf.
No, way, let's
disrupt the disability discourse.
It's the Disability
Disrupters Podcast with Dr.
Pam MacNeill.
Hi everyone, and welcome
to another episode of Disability
Disruptors, the show that disrupts
people's expectations of disabled
people, which are often extremely low.
Today I'm joined by Nikita Van Dijk,
and I want to pass on my congratulations
to Nikita, who has recently been
selected as one of the members of the
refresh group looking at refreshing
the New Zealand disability strategy.
Also, in this program, there is a segment
of   a recent presentation that I gave
to a webinar called Korero for Change,
and this is just a few minutes long.
I'm going to include that here as
well to get a conversation started
about employment of disabled
people in the disability sector.
Disability Disrupters is
proudly brought to you by Disability
Responsiveness New Zealand.
At DRNZ, we produce and facilitate
workshops for non disabled people to
learn about how they can respond well
to the rights and needs of the one in
four people who experience disability.
We also develop and facilitate workshops
and mentoring programs for disabled
people so they can build a great life.
I'm joined
today by Nikita Van Dijk.
Hi Nikita.
Kia ora, how are you?
Good, it's really
great to have you on the show.
Well, hi I'm Nikita, or
some people call me Nikki Van Dijk.
I am disabled complexly.
So I have several chronic illnesses,
including Ehlers Danlos Syndrome
and Complex Regional Pain Syndrome.
I'm also neurodiverse.
I'm a Master's student at the
University of Waikato undertaking
a Master's in Disability and
Inclusion Studies, following a
Bachelor's of arts and psychology.
I'm in Whangarei.
I love music.
I love reading.
I'm a little bit of a nerd as well.
And I also have a big passion for
martial arts and self defense.
I did Shaolin Kenpo competitively
for about 15 years and I
still train personally as a
bit of a outlet for myself.
And in your
spare time, you breathe.
Yeah, basically.
Breathe and sleep.
Doesn't sound like
you've got much spare time at all.
Gosh.
But I love it that way.
I'm really interested
in what you're talking about
in terms of your martial arts.
I guess you do that too to keep
fit, don't you, now that you're not
so much into the competitive side?
I do, yeah.
And you go to university,
you're doing a master's degree.
Gosh I'm sure you and I could just do
an interview on going to university
and  the complexities of that, but how
are you finding it as a disabled woman?
I am finding it, I
won't lie, it's quite challenging.
I'm quite lucky enough that my
master's programme is entirely hybrid.
So I can study from home or if I
am in hospital or I need to travel
for work, I can study anywhere.
And then just to see my supervisors
on campus as needed but there's
still its own challenges.
A lot of tertiary institutes are
not set up properly for hybrid
learning or online learning.
A lot of staff don't
understand dynamic disability.
I'm lucky that my supervisors
do, but throughout my educational
journey, a lot of them don't.
Which has created its own challenges,
but it's also quite isolating studying
hybrid as a disabled person who's
already quite isolated from society.
So,
yeah, I studied isolated
because it was through COVID.
And I had actually just finished all
my research interviews with people,
fortunately, and most of them actually had
been done over the phone or zoom anyway.
But, it was during lockdown
that I actually started writing.
So it kind of worked out okay for me,
but it is quite isolating, you're right.
And I stopped going up to
Massey for my meetings and
things, which I really missed.
There's nothing like being in the
same room with your supervisors.
No, there's not.
And I love my supervisors dearly.
They not only challenge me, but they're so
empathetic and they're so understanding.
And they're really kind people and
quite interesting to talk to as well.
Are they
disabled people themselves?
I'm not 100 percent sure.
I know one of them, Katrina,
studies inclusion with a bit of
a special interest in disability.
Her papers are really interesting.
And Tracy, who is my
other supervisor overseas.
The accessibility services at the
university, I don't know much about
their experiences with disability.
I don't know them too well on a
personal level, but I know that
they've got a very good understanding.
Very good research in it and
they're really keen to help.
So that's my battle.
That does make
such a difference, doesn't it?
When you've got really
supportive supervisors.
And in terms of just the
accessibility of other parts of
the university, do you find that a
challenge or is it pretty well okay?
Oh, it's a huge challenge.
I've been quite vocal about it, which
is why I've ended up where I have.
So I'm an ambulatory wheelchair user.
I don't know if you have been
to the University of Waikato.
No, I haven't.
As much as I love
studying there, I really do.
I can go on and on about how amazing
the university is to study at.
The physical campus is a nightmare.
Everything's on a hill a lot of the time.
And I'm lucky that my chair is
electric, but for the first half of my
bachelor's, I was in a manual chair.
So no, it was a huge challenge to interact
with my peers and to study in person
purely because if you even got into the
buildings, like all the doors were really
heavy and I couldn't open them on my own.
A lot of the lecture theatres were
not set up for a wheelchair user.
So there were stairs everywhere.
So I'd have to sit at the front in front
of everyone, kind of like segregated.
I could feel people staring at me,
which I really didn't appreciate.
But a lot of the time, the staff
were very courteous, allowed
me to use lecture recordings.
So that negated a lot of the negative
in person experiences I found.
I'm interested that
you said that people stare at you.
I'm guessing that most of your
peers are fairly young people
and you're a young person.
You hear today that attitudes are
different, that people are different
because they've been to school
with disabled children, they've
grown up with disabled children.
Do you find it?
That's not been
my personal experience.
I know that it has been for some.
I think that attitudes surrounding some
disabilities and such as neurodiversity
and the use of walking sticks and
crutches has definitely changed.
When I'm using my walking stick
the, there's no surprises there.
There's no staring But when I use my
chair, yes, there's a lot of judgmental
looks there is a lot of judgmental, like,
comments and stares especially because
often when I'm sitting in my chair
studying, I'll cross my legs just because
it's more comfortable, and the amount of
comments I've had, why are you using  a
wheelchair, if you can walk, if you can
move your legs, if you can cross them, if
I stand up briefly to go to the bathroom,
the judgment, don't even get me started
on if I'm parking in a disability park,
and I get out of the car and pull out my
wheelchair, there's a whole other story.
To summarize it though, I think the
attitude regarding some mobility
aids has changed but not quite.
Not wheelchairs.
So there's some pretty rigid
assumptions being made, aren't there?
I know when I had partial vision, I mean
I'm totally blind now, but when I had
partial vision it was very difficult.
It was far more difficult.
from an attitudinal standpoint, external
attitudinal standpoint, than being
totally blind because although people
don't really understand blindness either.
In fact, now I keep getting, how
much can you see, which is bizarre
because I've just told them I'm blind.
But when you have some vision or
some mobility or whatever it is,
people just seem to think, oh,
but you should be in this box.
Why don't you fit in this neat box?
It really challenges people, doesn't it?
It really does.
And that's why I quite like talking
about how I have a dynamic disability.
I came across that term, I can't
exactly remember where, but a couple
of years ago now, and it's been a game
changer in educating people around me.
I go, well, some days I can walk,
some days I can use my walking stick
and other days I am in so much pain
I just cannot cope without my chair.
And using a term such as dynamic
disability creates a different picture
in people's minds  sets the scene
a little bit easier So people don't
think so rigid about boxes and so rigid
about what disability should look like.
It's got more fluidity
Speaker 2: Right.
Yeah, i've heard the term before In terms
of people with multiple sclerosis, for
example And those effects can be very
much the same, being able to maybe move
around some degree some days and not
others, etc. And even having good vision
one day and not others, just depending.
What other barriers have
you dealt with, I guess?
The major ones that you've dealt with
in your life so far, and I'm really
interested in terms of supporting
other people as well, and how
you've managed those and what you
might be able to pass on to others.
I think immediately what
comes to mind is a lot of people
did not realize in my life that
I was disabled until quite late.
Including my family.
So, for example, I wasn't diagnosed
with Ehlers Danlos Syndrome until 20.
Now that's still considered early.
Within New Zealand statistics and don't
even get me started on that because
we would never finish this podcast.
I had been having issues since I was a
very young child with my joints, with
getting sick constantly with digestive
issues, et cetera mobility issues.
And it was always just painted as,
oh, they're being a hypochondriac.
They're being dramatic.
So, access to medical care, access to
understanding doctors, once my family and
my friends did believe me became even more
of a challenge because exactly that, the
stigma and the attitude of, oh, if you're
disabled, you do this, this, and this.
So, for example, if you're really in that
much pain, you're just sitting in bed,
doing nothing, feeling sorry for yourself.
Now, that's not how I was raised.
I was raised within, for example,
a martial arts setting, where you
put on a brave face and you push on.
Now I know that, now, that that is
actually quite dangerous for my body,
but however, I, as a result, I was not
the stereotypical,  chronic pain person.
I was doing a bachelor's.
I was still competing in martial arts
and doing some martial arts workshops.
I was living quite an active
life with my husband at the time.
I was socializing with my friends
constantly, traveling to see my family
in Tobor and Auckland, and I was
living a very full life still, which
I think Because of the stereotype of
what disability and chronic illness
looks like, threw a lot of people.
But also, I've found that
people still have the idea that
young people can't be disabled.
Which has been
That's very true.
Yeah.
Which is a challenge.
And the best of times Oh,
you can't possibly have that.
You're so young is a constant comment.
Also the biggest barrier I have
found is the toxic positivity.
Now, just so I'm clear, I do
believe in a positive mindset.
I know that the more that you hyper
focus on your circumstances and the
negative side of those circumstances,
it creates a negative feedback loop.
Learnt that in my psych degree.
However, I also don't believe that being
toxically positive helps anything, either,
because then you push yourself too far,
Explain a bit more about
what you actually mean by toxically
positive, in detail, if you would?
Yes, so toxic positivity,
If I give an example of, oh, but think
of the bright side at least you can,
for example, my digestive issues, right?
I really struggle to
eat meat, for example.
I used to love steak growing
up and now I just can't do it.
And people are, oh,
think of the positives.
At least you get to eat
takeaways whenever you want.
Not realizing that takeaways
makes me feel really gross because
of all that heaviness, right?
Look at the bright side, that you get to
just travel around in a chair whenever you
want, but society's not set up for me to
travel around in a chair whenever I want.
Oh, look on the bright side, at least
your walking stick matches your outfits.
Yeah, but I would rather not
need this in the first place.
But it's just such fun.
It is bizarre, isn't it?
And yes, I must admit, I've also
come across that, and I totally
taitoko what you're saying.
I think that you, me, and Stella
Young could have had some very
interesting conversations.
Have you seen the video that Stella does?
I'm Not Your Inspiration.
Thank you very much.
Seen that?
Yes.
That's awesome, isn't it?
I loved it and
I very much live by that.
Oh, you're an inspiration for all you do.
No, I'm just trying to live my life.
Can you just back up a bit?
Speaker 2: You talked about when
you were younger and that you
knew that there were some issues
for you in terms of impairment.
How did you feel?
Like, I'm really interested.
You said that nobody really realized until
you were 20 and that, It kind of, it felt
odd, and I'm interested because just a bit
of personal disclosure, I was always told
that my sight would never get any worse,
and so when it started getting worse when
I was a teenager, it was really difficult.
So I'm wondering for you, what was
teenagehood like with that overlay?
I spent a lot of my
teenage life being in denial.
I think so exactly that I was undiagnosed.
I was that kid in school that
had the constant knee issues.
So it was constantly in
braces or on crutches kind
of expected to joke about it.
So I had to be really lighthearted about
the fact that, oh, I was constantly
in pain or, oh, my kneecap would
just slip out whenever it wanted.
That's horrible.
That's toxic positivity, isn't it?
Yeah.
Constantly expected to be upbeat,
look at the positives and oh, you
know, everything will be fine being
the butt of people's joke about it.
And I was very much in denial
because everyone around me
was not taking it seriously.
I wouldn't take it seriously.
So I can't pretend that
anything's wrong here.
I can't acknowledge what's going
on when deep down I knew, I knew
something wasn't right at all.
Not just with my joints, but I
would get fatigued a lot quicker.
As I said, my digestive issues,
I dealt with really bad insomnia
as a result of chronic pain.
I was fainting a lot in
my teenage years as well.
So I would, for example, go and
have a hot shower and then I would
pass out, hit my head constantly.
How did you manage discussing
that with your parents when you
really knew, but didn't want to know?
And boy, do I know what that's like.
How did you manage that with your parents?
I won't lie.
It was difficult for a few years.
My mother was very much
more understanding.
She was still kind of in denial for
herself, but that turns out it's
because she experienced the same
things and has the same condition.
Just milder.
My father I don't think my father
really knew much about it, to be honest
because he was constantly at work.
He was basically the sole breadwinner
through my teenage years, because my mum
was taking me to doctor's appointments,
trying to get my knee stabilised,
because at the time we just thought,
Oh, if we fix the knee, it's a martial
arts injury, everything will be fine.
Newsflash, but not.
But
My parents did their best to support
me, but there was also contention
because I would for example, I had
a fall and I thought Oh, I'm pretty
sure I've dislocated my shoulder.
And my parents were like, no,
no, no, you can't have done that.
Don't be dramatic.
I get to school and my shoulder had
ballooned to the point where we actually
had to cut my bra strap to get my bra off.
We couldn't move.
And it had turned out that
I had popped my shoulder.
So it was all to say it was a debate
quite a lot through my teenage years.
I had very supportive family because
they knew something was wrong, but it was
to the degree that something was wrong.
They expected everything to kind
of stabilize and get better,
which just wasn't what happened.
So what would you, what
would you tell your teenage self
now if you had the opportunity?
In other words, I guess what I'm
asking you to do is to share insights
and tips to others who might, at this
very minute, have similar issues.
I would tell myself in my
teenage years that your new motto to
life is to live life through adaption.
So I choose to live my
life to the fullest extent.
I just have to adapt it in
different ways than other people.
And that by forcing yourself to try
and do everything in the same way that
everyone else is doing things, you're
only going to cause yourself more pain.
And you're also only going to feel
more grief when you realize you
can't do what your peers are doing.
So adapt what you're doing.
There's no shame in it.
And there's no shame in
arguing that something's wrong.
It's okay to advocate for yourself
in that sense and get yourself
the supports that you need.
Excellent, great advice.
And do you find now that you helping
others with advocacy as well as yourself?
Yes I have been able to
support multiple people to get diagnosed
with the same condition that I do
because they were bringing up their
own experiences and I went, look, full
disclosure, I'm no doctor, but this
is something I experienced as a kid.
And if you really are worried, I
encourage you to speak to your doctor.
And for, I think it's about six of
my friends now, it's turned out that
they've had the same condition that I
do once they went and saw specialists.
So, I've been able to advocate for
people to not only get diagnosis,
but within, for example, NDSA, the
National Disabled Students Association,
I've been able to help people get
reasonable accommodations and supports
to help them continue with their study.
Fantastic.
That's great.
And speaking of study and
going back to your masters.
What are you looking to achieve
once you finish that degree?
Oh, when I've
finished my Masters, the study
doesn't end, I want to do a PhD.
I don't have to worry
about that, I've just finished mine.
I want to create a
framework for youth with rare disorders,
particularly Ehlers Danlos Syndrome, to
I want to be able to study through school
from primary all the way up to tertiary.
And I know that that's a big ask,
but I, that's what I want to do.
Because I know that in high school,
if I, in particular, if I had known
that I had a rare disorder, I would
have appreciated being able to have a
framework to go to my teachers and to
who else was supporting me at the time
and going, okay, this is what I need.
I need to be able to study hybrid.
I need to be able to have this
accommodation for my classes or
I'm on this medication, which means
that the side effects are going to
affect me at this period of the day.
So I need accommodations for this
being able to plan things adequately.
And that's what I want
to use my PhD to do.
I'm wondering about
maybe working for the Ministry of
Education or something like that.
Basically anywhere that
I can do disability research I want
my PhD to be in exactly that, the
creation of a, Framework for rare
disorders within education, but I want
to do all sorts of research and in
regards to disability I want to look at
neurodivergence and its correlation with
multiple different types of disability.
I want to create disability policy
within workplaces to make workplaces
more accessible, disability action plans.
I'm hugely passionate about disability
action plans If you were asking
me, Everywhere should have them.
Tertiary institutes, high schools,
primary schools, workplaces,
government organizations, everywhere
should have disability action plans.
I love them.
You're a true force of nature.
I feel tired just listening to you,
but yeah, I think that it sounds
as if you're going to have a great
future in research and advocacy.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Sounds wonderful.
What other things do you want
for your life and to be able
to maybe work with others?
There's a lot to be honest.
So I'm currently public speaking for
a couple of different organisations,
I guest lecture for a couple of
different universities as well, on
leadership, disability within education
particularly at the university of
Waikato, I guess, lecture for one of
their courses on supporting teachers
to teach disabled students and the
experiences of disabled students.
So I want to continue that.
I want to continue public speaking.
I want to continue working
with disability organizations.
I do want to set up a dojo at some point
where I can teach adaptive martial arts.
From a base.
What a great idea.
Yeah, and would that include
people with other impairments?
Would you be interested in teaching
blind people say for example?
One of the best
martial artists that I ever met
at my dojo was a blind woman.
Mm hmm.
And I asked how she was
able to do her form work so clearly.
And when I say that it was beautiful.
It was immaculate.
Her hands and her arms would
always be in the correct place.
And She was like, I can feel it.
I can feel the floor.
I can feel where everything needs to be.
So I want to support all impairments
to be able to do martial arts.
I recognize that I can't remember the
specific statistics, but I did read
that disabled people are more likely to
experience violence, whether it's bullying
or whether it's domestic violence.
And I want to be able to support
disabled people to defend themselves.
And I very much believe in Shaolin
Kenpo being one of the best,
and I will die on that hill.
But I want to support everyone.
So for example, my brother who is
autistic, he used to train with me.
I do want to support disabled people.
Blind people to train.
I want to support people
in wheelchairs to train.
I want to support those with
intellectual disabilities to train.
I want to support deaf people to train.
Everyone.
I want it to be a career in itself.
So it sounds to me like
you're into multiple careers.
To be honest, none of
my family members, even in their own
careers, have ever  understood the
word relax or retirement or holiday.
Yeah, I don't use
the R word for retirement either,
even though I am between you and I
over 65, but retire, what's that?
Think for some disabled people it takes
us quite some time to establish ourselves
as professionals or in whatever avenue
that we want to work in, whether it's
voluntarily or in a paid capacity, that
we don't necessarily have an end date.
I completely agree with you.
It takes so much longer
for us to get established.
Sorry for my constant moving.
My legs get pretty sore pretty quickly.
I think it takes so much longer for us
to get established within employment
and within a career compared to non
disabled people, especially when
we're trying to do what we love.
And the disability sector, of
which I want to go into, is
notoriously hard to get into, even
though you're a disabled person.
It's, I have feelings there.
I'd really like to hear those
feelings, if you're prepared to share.
I am.
A little bit of context,  I'm quite
blunt, which sometimes gets me in
a bit of trouble, but it works.
I don't think there's enough
disabled people in leadership.
I think we're consulted on
quite often in a lot of spaces.
And don't get me wrong, we could
be consulted a lot more than we
are, but often we're consulted
with, and we're not leading.
And we should be leading.
And I also think within the disability
sector, certain disabilities
are ranked is the wrong word.
I don't know what word
I would use, though.
For example, if I use my experience
I struggle to find paid employment
because I use a wheelchair.
Whereas my brother has perhaps not
struggled so much because a lot of people
find, at least in his experience, I know
this is not everyone's experience, but
in his experience, Autistic people are
easier to support within the workplace
than say, somebody who uses a wheelchair.
If I can be crass,
they look normal compared to us.
Yes.
Because we use guide dogs,
wheelchairs, white canes, whatever.
And so I feel  like
ranking's the wrong word, perhaps,
but I'm not sure quite what else
it's a kind
of hierarchy, isn't it?
Yeah.
So I believe that there
needs to be more representation
of different types of disabilities
within the disability sector.
I believe that there needs to be
more disabled people in leadership.
If it boils down to it, we need more
disabled people in leadership, rather
than just being consulted with, we need
to be the ones leading the charge, and
we are more than capable of doing so.
That was actually the
whole thrust of my PhD thesis,
so I'll have to send you a copy.
And yeah, I couldn't agree more.
I think that leadership and management
is extremely important and I mean, I
suppose if you think about it, every
other group in society that you can
think of is led and managed by its
own members, which is as it should be.
And probably the disability
sector is the only one that's not.
I completely
agree with you though.
I will just keep echoing it, there's
not enough disabled people in
leadership and I couldn't tell you why.
I really couldn't tell you why, other
than maybe for some places it's easier
for example, to not hire wheelchair
users because accessibility, trying
to fix that is a whole nightmare.
Which doesn't make it fair.
Yeah.
And I know life's not fair, but that's, I
get very upset and angry about it, to be
honest because I watch other incredible
leaders, forget myself for a sec, I watch
other incredible leaders struggle to
find work because their disabilities are
dynamic and change, for example, they're
not, Staple, the same, constant, that
some days they will be fine, other days
they will be in hospital, other days they
need a chair, some days they can need
no mobility aid, and they struggle to
find work, but they are some of the most
dedicated, passionate, smart, empathetic
people I have ever met in my life, and
they struggle to get work just because
their disability is, is what it is.
Yeah.
And so it tells us, I think, that
there needs to be more universality
in the design of not only the built
environment, but also in workplaces
and in the way we think about people
and the way that we accommodate people
and the recognition that we share such
a lot, but we have our differences
and those things enrich all of us.
I am a huge believer
that there needs to be some sense
of compulsory education within the
workplace on, at minimum, the social
model of disability, but preferably
the human rights model of disability.
Because I think that would change
a lot of things, to be honest.
I agree.
I think it would be very helpful.
And that's an area that I work in, but
it's very hard to convince people that
they need something they didn't know they
wanted or they didn't know they needed.
Once they've had the training,
then they recognize they needed it.
But it's getting your foot in the
door, as with so many other things.
I want to say, a lot of
disabled leaders that I've met get
discouraged because they feel like
they're not disabled enough, or they're
not disabled in a certain way, or they're
not eloquent enough that's not true.
That is not true.
I personally got to where I am, and
I believe this with every fibre of
my being, because I just wouldn't
shut up, and I called it as it is.
I didn't use any fancy language, I
didn't use any particular tone, I just
wouldn't shut up, and I kept going with
my passion, and when one door shut, I
looked for another door that was open.
You don't have to be a
certain image of disabled.
You don't have to be pleasing on
the ear to listen to in that sense,
tone wise or using fancy language.
Passion is enough and if you
keep pushing, doors will open.
Three years ago, I wouldn't think that
I'm speaking to you about my experience.
I wouldn't think that I would be
guest lecturing for unis or having
had done a workshop with the United
Nations sector, which is called
UNESCO on rare disorders in education.
Oh, I would have laughed in your
face if you had told me that.
But I kept yelling and
that's how I got here.
Yeah, so don't
just knock on those doors.
Hammer on them.
Absolutely insist that they be
open, is what I'm hearing from you.
Take a sledgehammer
and sledge through that door.
Nikita, you're
such a breath of fresh air.
It's been wonderful speaking to
you today and I want to wish you
all the very, very best for the
future in everything that you do.
I'm absolutely sure that we'll keep
hearing your name again and again.
And I hope our paths continue to cross.
Thank you so much.
I hope so, too.
Thank you so much for this opportunity
Introducing Ask Dr. Pam,
the advice segment, where Dr. Pam
MacNeill answers your questions
with expertise, empathy, and a
passion for disability rights.
So  the
question  that  we  are  reflecting  on
is,  what  is  the  role  of  employment
in  fostering  inclusion  and  belonging?
I  want  to  start
a  courageous  conversation
by  focusing  on  inclusion  and
belonging  ,   through  employment
in  the  disability  sector  itself.
This  includes  all  work
undertaken  in  our  name,  the
name  of  disabled  people.
So  it  means, within  support
services,  DPOs,  government
jobs,  where  disability  is  a
focus  right  across  the  board.
Research  shows  that, barriers  to
employment,  tenure,  and  promotion
are  prevalent  in  the  disability
sector,  just  as  prevalent  as  they
are  anywhere  else,  and  I  should
know,  I  did  the  research,  and  I'm
happy  to  share  that  with  anyone  and
everyone  who  might  be  interested.
Ableism  is  also  common.
You  might  be  surprised  to  hear,
and  this  includes  casual  ableism,
which  is  a  term  I've  developed  to
mean  when  people decide  that  they're
going  to  use  terms  such  as  turning
a  blind  eye  or  a  deaf  ear   it's
important  that  disabled  people  model,
what  is  possible  and  I  did  do  that
for  18  years  when  I  was  the  manager
of  the  Mainstream  Employment  Programme
and  I  korero  what  Gretchen  was  just
saying  that ,  it's  really  important
that  we  do  model  these  things,  that
supported  employment  is  definitely  a
way  to  get  your  foot,  your  wheel,
your  guide  dog  in  the  door  of
employment,  and  I  know  that  during
the  time  I  managed  the  Mainstream
Programme over  3 ,000  people  got  work
and  a  couple  of  years  after  their
placements  finished,  61  percent  of
those  people  were  still  in  work.
So  I  think  that  proves  that
that's  a  very  good  way  to  manage
a  program  for  disabled  people.
Lots of  purists  say  it  shouldn't
have  to  happen  that  way.
I  agree,  but  let's  face
it,  we  don't  live  in  a
perfect  world,  far  from  it.
At  the  moment,   we're  in  a
position  where  too  many  people
speak  on  behalf  of  disabled
people  when  we're  perfectly
capable  of  speaking  for  ourselves.
Many  people  who  work  in  the
disability  sector  or  the  disability
industry  as  I've  heard  it  called,
which  then  makes  us  commodities,
,  feel  that  disabled  people  are
not  able  to  work  in  some  of
these  positions,  that  we're  not
qualified  and  we  don't  have  the
potential  that  they  might  have.
But  how  can  we  promote  the
abilities  of  disabled  people
to  others  if  we  don't  employ
disabled  people  ourselves?
So  the  sector  is  currently  not
practising  what  it  preaches.
An  example  of  this  is,   a
couple  of  large  disability
agencies  in  Australasia  recently,
went  to  employ  their  chief
executives  and  they  had  lots  of
applications  from  disabled  people.
Extremely  well  qualified,
internationally  recognised  disabled
people  and  neither  of  those
organisations  took  up  the  opportunity.
In  fact,  they  did  everything  they
could  to  avoid  doing  the  right
thing,  which  is  employing  someone
from  the  group  they  support.
Lived  experience  of  disability  needs
to  be  a  key  component  of  what  we
call  merit  in  the  disability  sector.
And  by  the  way,  merit  actually
is  a  general  principle,  advantage
is  the  already  privileged.
But  if  we're  going  to  talk
about  merit,  let's  include
lived  experience  of  disability
for disability sector work.
Disability alone,  doesn't  qualify
disabled  people  for  leadership.
I  know  that,  but  then  neither
does being non-disabled either.
So  you  don't  automatically  get  a
hospital  pass  if  you're  non -disabled.
Everyone  has  to  have  skills,
abilities,  experience,  etc.
That's  well  recognised.
The  thing  that  needs  to  be
recognised  is  that  disabled  people
have  the  authentic  mandate  to
lead  and  manage  our  own  sector.
Just  as  others  lead  and  manage
their  own  sectors,  it  really
isn't  that  difficult  to  work
out  why  this  would  be  the  case.
I  challenge  all  of  you  here
today  to  intentionally  attract,
recruit  and  retain  disabled
people  into  work  in  your  sectors,
particularly  in  leadership  roles.
And  I'm  very  happy  for  my  email
to  be  shared  if  people  would  like
to  hear  more  about  my  research.
I  came  up  with  some  very
practical  ways  that  we  could
increase  employment,  particularly
in  the  disability  sector.
Thank  you  very  much.
One  of
the  questions  is,  "How  do  we  get
around  Still  not  feeling  safe  to
tell  our  stories. Our  stories  aren't
always  inspirational  and  always
flatter  potential  employers  honestly.
So  how  do  we  boldly  go  there,  when
we  also  need  to  make  a  living?"
Can  I  make
a  comment,  please?
It's  Pam  McNeill  here  from
Disability  Responsiveness  New  Zealand.
I  would  like  to  hear  from
you  about  your  stories.
I  run  a  monthly  podcast
called  Disability  Disrupters.
So  please  do  get  in  touch.
I'm  really  wanting  to
promote  those  stories.
That's a wrap for this month's edition
of the Disability Disrupters Podcast.
Don't forget, you can get in touch
by emailing disrupters@drnz.co.nz.
We'd really love to hear from you.
Bye for now.
Hi, everyone.
We hope you're enjoying Disability
Disrupters We want to bring you
many more stories, insights, and
conversations with disabled people that
challenge the norm and inspire change.
We're passionate about continuing to share
these important voices and perspectives.
But to do that, we need you.
We need your support.
If you're finding value in what we
do and want to help us bring more
content to you and others, please
consider leaving a donation in the tip
jar on the Disability Responsiveness
New Zealand website at www.drnz.co.nz
Every contribution, no matter the
size, Helps us to keep the conversation
going and reach more disabled people.
Thank you for being part of our
community and for helping us to disrupt
the status quo in many positive ways.
Together, we can continue
to make a difference.